                        Programmer's Reference Disk
                        Frequently Asked Questions
                             Updated 02-10-96

What do I need to do to talk to my weather station?

     Davis weather stations require a WeatherLink in order to
communicate. The WeatherLink, in combination with the supplied
adapters, communicates through an RS-232 serial interface.. You
must provide the routines to drive the serial port, or use a
third-party communication library to do it for you. The file
"techref.txt" describes the commands used to extract data from
the weather station. . The file "techref.doc" contains the same
information formatted for MS Word for Windows 6.0. The commands
used are a combination of ASCII and binary data. Source code
examples are given in both "C" and Visual Basic.

What is the difference between ASCII and Binary (or hex) data?

     ASCII is an encoding scheme that maps each letter, digit,
and most punctuation symbols on a standard keyboard into a number
between 0 and 255 (one byte of data). For example the letter "a"
is equal to 97 or 0x61; "b" = 98 = 0x62; "A" = 65 = 0x41; "B" =
66 = 0x42; "1" = 49 = 0x31 "2" = 50 = 0x32; and "+" = 43 = 0x2B.
     Standard text files (.txt) are ASCII files because when the
encoding scheme is applied to the data in the file, the result is
recognizable letters, digits, and punctuation symbols.
     Binary data, on the other hand, is the actual underling
number system. Binary data usually does not make any sense when
treated as if it were ASCII. Hex data refers to binary data
expressed in hexadecimal notation (base 16). Hex data is
indicated by the characters "0x" placed in front of the number.
     As an example, the command for reading the outside
temperature on the Monitor station can be represented as either
ASCII or Hex data, but it is most easily understood as a
combination of the two ("<CR>" is a carriage return character):

ASCII:     "WRDDV"<CR>
Hex:      0x57, 0x52, 0x44, 0x44, 0x56, 0x0D
Combined:  "WRD",0x44,0x56,<CR>.

     The description of the "WRD" command is: "WRD n | bank
address". Further examination of the description reveals that the
above command will read 4 nibbles (2 bytes) from address 56 hex
in bank 1 of the weather station's ram.

     All data returned by the WeatherLink is binary data. For
example if the above command is sent and the temperature was 73.2
degrees F the following data stream would be returned:

0x06,            (This is ACK to acknowledge the command)
0xDC,            (The least significant byte of data)
0x02             (The most significant byte of data)

     The data, in hex, is 0x02DC which is equal to 732 in
decimal. Since temperatures are stored in tenths of a degree,
this number should be divided by 10 to get 73.2 degrees F. None
of the three bytes returned correspond to printable ASCII
characters.

     It is difficult to use a standard terminal emulation program
(such as Procomm or the Windows terminal program) for more than
just verifying the connection. It is possible to create a binary
download file of the WeatherLink's archive memory with a standard
terminal program that has the Xmodem file transfer protocol.

Why is the temperature 700 degrees?

     All data and math on the weather station (and link) is done
with integers (i.e. no fractions). In order for the station to
display tenths of a degree (for temperatures), or thousandths of
an inch of mercury (for the barometer), the data stored in memory
must be divided by 10 (or 1000) using floating point arithmetic.
Therefore the temperature should be read as 70.0 degrees, not 700
degrees.

Why doesn't the Barometer data in the LOOP command match what is
displayed on the station?

     The weather station measures the absolute atmospheric
pressure. In order to convert this to a Standard Barometric
pressure, the station subtracts a calibration offset value. This
is determined by having the user enter the desired Barometric
reading (derived from some other source i.e. airport, newspaper
etc.). The station stores the difference between the desired
reading and the actual reading in the "StnDrd" memory register.
This calibration number must be subtracted from the current
Station data and Link data including the sensor interface (LOOP)
and archived data.
     Note: since at higher elevations the absolute pressure
decreases, the barometric pressure is generally larger than the
atmospheric pressure and since the calibration number is
subtracted from the data, it is generally a negative number. It
is 2 bytes long.

     In general, current temperature, current outside humidity,
and rain displays have a calibration number that needs to be
taken into account for the LOOP data to match the station's
displayed value. Please see "Reading Calibrated Data" (section
VIII-A) in "techref.txt" for more details.

Why isn't there a simple command to get the current wind speed?

     Davis Instruments did not include commands to retrieve
separate weather data values (such as wind speed, or inside
temperature) because there are so many different pieces of data
stored on the weather station, because the newest stations
(GroWeather, Energy, and Health ) have new features added, and
because we can't anticipate all the possible desires of
programmers. The WeatherLink uses a fairly primitive, but very
flexible, communication protocol. All memory is available for
examination and modification with a few commands. The LOOP
command provides compact data packets of the most important data
values and is the simplest way to get information on the current
weather conditions.

How often is the data updated?

     Wind speed data on the station is updated every 2 1/4
seconds on the Monitor, and Wizard stations. On the GroWeather,
Energy, and Health stations wind speed is updated every 3
seconds. The wind speed data in the sensor image (and hence the
LOOP data packets) is updated from the station data at least once
a second.
     Wind direction on the weather station is measured
approximately once a second. These measurements are filtered
through a low pass filter. The filter has a 2 second time
constant. The link reads the stations wind direction with the
same frequency as it reads the wind speed.
     The rate of update of the other weather variables (inside
and outside temperature, inside and outside humidity, leaf
wetness, sun, and UV. Rain is dealt with separately below.)
depends, in part, on what is being shown on the station's LCD
display. On the Monitor, Wizard, and Perception stations, the
sensor from which the displayed data is derived (the primary
sensor) is read approximately once a second. Other sensors are
read less frequently: approximately every 20 seconds.
     If the displayed data does not depend on a sensor (other
than the anemometer), for example the station time, date, rain,
wind speed or direction, then all the sensors are read equally
approximately every 15 seconds.
     On the GroWeather, Energy, and Health stations the primary
sensor is read approximately every 6 seconds. Other sensors are
read approximately every 13 seconds. When there is no primary
sensor, then all sensors are read approximately every 12 seconds.
     The Rain value on the station is updated as soon as a rain
click happens. On the GroWeather, Energy and Health stations the
rain rate is also updated at the same time.
     Wind chill, dew point, THI, and THSWI values are
recalculated whenever one of the sensors that are used in the
calculation is read. Degree-days, wind run, solar energy, and UV
dose are calculated every minute. ET is calculated by the
GroWeather link once an hour.
     The link updates inside and outside temperatures, rain rate,
solar rad, and UV intensity from the station data every 10 wind
speed readings or approximately every 7 seconds. Every time the
sensor image is sampled the link reads the station's total rain,
barometer, inside and outside humidity, total wind run, total
degree days, total ET, solar energy, and leaf wetness. The
GroWeather, Energy, and Health links also read this data every 16
seconds in addition to when the sensor image is sampled.

Where is the data I want?
Which copy should I use?

     There are several places to look to find the information you
want from the weather station. We will describe them here in
general, but you must consult the appropriate memory table in
section IX of "techref.txt" to find the specific address.
     The first place to look for your data is in the weather
station processor memory. This is 256 bytes of memory directly
accessible by the station processor, organized into 2 banks of
256 nibbles. All the information that is displayed on the
station's LCD is held in the station's memory. This includes: the
current value of each sensor, hi and low values of each sensor,
time and date of each hi or low, calibration numbers, alarm
settings, calculated data values (dewpoint, wind chill THI etc.),
and the current station time and date. This information is
available with the "WRD" & "WWR" commands to read and write data
to the station processor memory. The GroWeather, Energy, and
Health stations can also use the "MDMP" command to receive a dump
of the entire station memory at once.
     While comprehensive, the station processor memory has the
important disadvantage of having a slow access speed. When you
send a "WRD" command to the link, it must pass the command on to
the station and wait for its reply before sending the data back
to the PC. The link also has processor memory. The link monitors
the station's current data values and stores them in its "sensor
image". It also keeps track of the station's time and date in the
TimeStamp field of the "archive image". The link processor memory
is accessed with the "RRD" & "RWD" commands to read and write
data respectively.
     There are a few pieces of data that are only found on the
link. These include:
  the sample period and archive period registers that control
     how the data is sampled and archived,
  the last archive time register that gives the time that the
     last archive was made (and thus when the next archive will
     be performed),
  the archive memory pointers that indicate where in the archive
     memory the next archive record will go and how full the
     archive memory is,
  the previous data registers that hold the value of
     accumulating data (such as rain or wind run) at the
     beginning of the current archive period,
  and the hi and low outside temperature archive fields that
     show the highest and lowest temperatures recorded in the
     current archive period.
     The link does not track "derived" or "calculated" data (i.e.
dewpoint, wind chill, THI etc.). nor does it track hi and low
values, except for outside temperature during the current archive
period.
     If you want a quick look at the current values, the LOOP
command sends copies of the sensor image to the PC. See "Using
the LOOP command" (section VIII-B) in "techref.txt" for more
details.
     Finally, the archive memory is a separate 32K storage buffer
that holds the archived data. This data is organized into equal
sized archive entries with the same format as the "archive image"
in the link processor memory. The "SRD" & "SWR" commands are used
to read and write parts of the archive memory. The "DMP" command
will download the entire archive memory (32K) using the Xmodem
protocol.
     On the GroWeather, Energy, and Health links, the last 256
bytes of the archive memory (addresses 0x7F00 to 0x7FFF), are
used to record the memory image from an MDMP command before
sending it on the computer and is not available for normal
archive purposes.

How do I get a snapshot of the station memory?

     On the GroWeather, Energy, and Health stations, the MDMP
command will return a CRC checked block of data that contains an
image of the entire station memory. It is very useful any time
you want to examine several station memory locations at once. For
instance, looking at all the Hi/Lows or all the Alarm thresholds.
See "Using the MDMP command" (section VIII-C) in techref.txt.
     There is no easy way to get a snapshot of the Link memory or
the memory of the Monitor, Wizard, or Perception. You could send
a series of WRD or RRD command to scan the full memory space, but
this will not generate an image of simultaneous data, and would
take a fairly large amount of time to accomplish.

How can I make my own "Bulletin" (Real-time display of the weather)?

     There are two separate parts of the bulletin display as
implemented in the PC Link program. One part is the continuous
display of the current weather conditions. The second is keeping
track of hi and low values as they occur. These are two somewhat
separate tasks. The hi and low tracking is optional.
     If hi and low tracking is to be done, you may want to
retrieve the hi and low values recorded on the station. For the
Monitor, Wizard, and Perception stations, you will need to issue
separate WRD commands for each hi, hi time, hi date, low, low
time, and low date that you wish to track. On the GroWeather,
Energy, and Health stations, the MDMP command will retrieve a
copy of the entire station memory from which you may extract the
desired information.
     To begin the real-time information stream, issue a LOOP
command for one packet. (The number of packets requested in one
command can be increased as you become more confident in your
programming, but it involves extra work to count the number of
packets received) The first character received is <ACK>
acknowledging the LOOP command, then a byte containing 0x01 (the
packet header byte). If either of these bytes are not correct,
then there has been some sort of error. Next comes the data and
CRC checksum bytes. These bytes should be read into a buffer and
CRC checked (see below).
     After CRC checking, the data is ready for extraction. The
description of the LOOP command gives the format of the LOOP data
packets (see section VI of "techref.txt"). This information is
also found in the description of the sensor image in the
appropriate link memory address table (see section IX of
"techref.txt"). "Using the LOOP command" (section VIII-B) in
"techref.txt" contains sample code to extract the data from a
buffer containing a LOOP packet.
     The data in the LOOP packet is only the current data
directly measured by sensors. If you would like to display
"derived" or "calculated" values (i.e. dewpoint, wind chill, THI
etc.) you should examine "Calculated Data values" (section VIII-
E) in "techref.txt" for instructions on how to calculate these
values.
     You should now have at your disposal the current values of
the variables you want to display. If you are tracking hi and low
values, test the current data against your previously recorded
hi/low values and adjust if necessary. After displaying the data,
issue another LOOP command and process the returned data.
     It is a good idea to have some way to monitor the status and
reliability of the communication channel. If there is an error or
a time-out condition, you can attempt to restart the data stream
with the following steps: first stop the stream of LOOP data by
sending another command (like a read of Link memory). Then wait a
1 or 2 seconds to let the serial port catch up. Then clear your
serial port's receive buffer and send the LOOP command again.
This is especially useful when you are requesting more than one
packet at a time, and a character is dropped in the middle of a
packet.

How do I use CRC checking?

     You have two choices. The simplest is to ignore the CRC
information. Read the CRC bytes off the serial port and throw
them away. The problem with this approach is that you are giving
up the opportunity to double check the reliability of the data
being sent to you. Presumably you would like to know if your
communication channel is not working correctly.
     In order to take advantage of CRC checking you will need to
compute a CRC checksum on the data as it arrives. When the Link's
CRC checksum is sent, continue processing the CRC checksum. If
the final resulting checksum is zero, then there was not a CRC
error in the packet you just received and you can be pretty sure
that the data received is the same as the data sent. See the code
for the "fill_crc_buffer()" function in section IV  and "CRC
Checking" (section VIII-F) in "techref.txt" for more details.

I want to track Degree-days, but my Monitor doesn't have this
data. Is there any way to get this data with what I have?

     There are several features found on our newest weather
stations (GroWeather, Energy, and Health) that, while they are
not available directly on the earlier stations, can be calculated
by a PC from data available in the archived data. These include
Degree-days, Temperature-Humidity Index, and Wind Run. Please see
"Calculated Data Values" (section VIII-E) in "techref.txt" for
more details.

Why is the maximum wind direction 15 degrees?

     The wind direction data stored in the archive indicates the
sector from which the most wind direction samples came from
during the archive period. These sectors correspond to the 16
direction arrows on the station compass rose: 0 = North, 1 =
North North East, 2 = North East, etc. On the GroWeather, Energy,
and Health stations, the direction of the hi wind speed is also
stored in this same format. See appendix F "Wind Direction Sector
Codes" in "appendix.txt" for more details.
     The wind direction in the sensor image (and LOOP packets) is
in degrees (0 - 359).

How are wind chill, dew point and THI calculated?

     The section "Calculated Data values" (section VIII-E) in
"techref.txt" contains a description of how to calculate some of
the "derived" data values found on the station.

What is the story with "Rev E" or "Wireless Ready" WeatherLinks?

     A new version of the WeatherLink hardware module was
developed in order to provide more reliable data communication
over potentially noisier communication channels (e.g. radios.).
Part of the difference involves changes to the WeatherLink
communication protocol. Specifically, every command sent to the
link must also include a CRC code so that the link can verify
that the command was transmitted correctly. Otherwise, the basic
commands and memory addresses are the same as the corresponding
Rev D WeatherLink.
     Because of this extra CRC code, software written for earlier
versions of the WeatherLink are incompatible with the Rev E
version.
     At the present time, Davis Instruments has only upgraded the
GroWeather software to support Rev E links. This is the only
model of WeatherLink that Davis currently ships as a Rev E. Rev E
versions of the Energy and Health EnviroMonitor WeatherLink
hardware are available through Davis' technical support, which
can be reached via email at support@davisnet.com.
     There are two approaches to programming the Rev E link:
compute CRC codes for each command, or set the WeatherLink into
"Rev D emulation mode".
     The sections entitled "Link Types and Revision Levels"
(section V) and "CRC Checking" (section VIII-F) in "techref.txt"
contain instructions on how to compute and transmit the necessary
command CRC codes, and implement the other changes in the
communication protocol.
     The commands "CRC0" and "CRC1" control the setting of the
"Rev D emulation mode". When the "Rev D emulation mode" is turned
on, the WeatherLink uses the identical communication protocol as
the Rev D link. The one thing to keep in mind, however, is that
if the station reboots, it will be as a Rev E link with the new
protocol until the "CRC0" command is issued.

Why can't I get the "CRC0" command to work?
Why can't I get the Rev E WeatherLink to go into "Rev D emulation
mode"?

     In order for the "CRC0" command to be recognized (or the
"CRC1" command), it must be sent using the active communication
protocol. The new communication protocol doesn't take effect
until AFTER the command is received and verified. This usually
means that you need to send the proper CRC code in addition to
the command string and return character. The necessary CRC for
the "CRC0" command has been precomputed and is given in the
"techref.txt" file. It consists of the two bytes (in decimal): 44
& 247 sent in this order. Also note that the fourth character of
the command is a zero character, not a capital 'o'.

Can I customize the WeatherLink's powersaving operation on a Rev E Link?

     No. The built-in powersaving mode operation is not software
configurable. If you require a different or more flexible
schedule than the one provided by the Link, you must purchase the
Timer option.

